I wanted to see those things continue and advance
uninterrupted. We were on the verge of really
bringing this university to a level of academic
statue that it had never had before because we were
finally getting to a stage of maturity after the
decisions that Dr. Rutter, I mean, President
Rutter had made of the expansion and all that had
been put into the university. And we were
beginning to reap a lot of what you and others had
done previous to our time. And I had spent so much
time completely redoing the entire
undergraduate academic program in focus. What
were some of those major changes?
so many new programs such as
the Center for Teaching Excellence. We had put in a
graduate student teaching enhancement program.
We had put in a student advising program from the
academic side. We had put in new strengths into the
tenure and promotion criteria so that credit
would be given to our best teachers and that that
would be a criteria upon which they would be
judged. We had strengthened the funding to the
academic program side at the undergraduate
level.
There are probably four or five more that we had put
into it, but also along with that, We had done
things to increase the faculty's training in the
academic process and in the classroom teaching.
When you look at education, it involves two
components. One is the content and the other is the
delivery. So we were really working hard to look at
the delivery and what we could do to enhance it.
Secondly, we had also worked hard on recruiting
top students here. We had gotten Texas A&M up to
third in National Merit Scholars. We had gone
ahead of the University of Texas. We should just
gall them. And who deserved credit for that? Well,
a lot of that came from the team that we put together
in the provost office and all of the associate
provosts. We now had an associate provost for
undergraduate studies. And it was that person's
responsibility to work with the academic deans in
all the colleges to really pay attention to what we
were doing in expanding our honors courses, our
advanced courses. We then had in that office, an
office for honors and, yeah, an office for honors.
Who led that? Dale Noble? Dale Noble. And Dale was
superb at getting out in the state and helping us
recruit those top-notch students. And I spent a
lot of time traveling with Dale to high schools.
And I spent a lot of time at events he would have here
on campus. We spent a lot of time also recruiting
top notch minority students. And we put in place
the outreach centers in the various strategic
areas of the state to try to get top notch minority
students who were National Merit Scholars or
National Hispanic Scholars, students who were
really bright and bring them here. So we put a lot of
time and effort into those kinds of things. Who was
the key coordinator of the minority recruitment?
A lot of that came under Sally Shepherd who was the
Associate Provost for Undergraduate Studies.
Among the deans that you work with, I'm not going to
ask the negative, which of the deans would you give
the highest marks to in those years? Well, I was
blessed to have some excellent deans and then I was
given the opportunity to recruit
almost all of the deans. during my time frame from
senior vice president, provost, through my whole
time in the president's office. And clearly,
Benton Coconauer in the College of Business. Dick
Ewing is a dean that I recruited that has just done a
fantastic job in the College of Science.
There's no question but what Ed Heiler in the
College of Agriculture. John Shattuck did a
terrific job for the College of Indian Medicine.
You know, it's hard when you start answering
questions like this because you don't want to
leave anyone out.
Walter Windler, who is now in the Chancellor's
office, did a great job with the College of
Architecture. I recruited the first woman dean
ever at A&M. It was Jane Stallings for the College
of Education.
Those deans formed such an incredible team. One
other one that was not a dean's title, but I made it a
dean's title, was the dean of libraries. I
should remember her name also. Fred Heath. Oh, are
you talking about Fred Heath? Fred Heath. Oh,
yeah. I recruited Fred Heath. and felt like that he
had the vision to move our library forward because
we put a tremendous amount of effort into the
current new expanded facilities to get that done
and increase the funding. He certainly is doing a
good job. And to get it technically advanced and
Fred had the know-how to get it technically
advanced. On your staff, who were the key people?
Oh, that's easy. Jeanette Ferris, who to me is, if
there's ever been someone that would be termed the
institutional memory and know-how of Texas A&M
University, it would be Jeanette Ferris. But she
is one. Jerry Gaston, who was my executive
associate provost. Danny Parker, who was
assistant provost for business affairs. They
were absolutely key and crucial. Where did you
find Jerry Gaston? Jerry was already there. Oh,
okay. And he was executive associate provost
under Don McDonald before I went to that position.
I made a lot of other changes when I was senior vice
president provost. One was to bring the graduate
educational programs, the masters and the PhD,
and the research to one office. They were so
closely linked, and yet with two different
offices there was a lot of wasted money and
overhead, and they were unable to bring it
together the way it needed. And I made some tough,
hard decisions in that area. And some people
probably in those offices got upset. But if you
don't make those decisions, then you're
fostering mediocrity. So I brought those
together into a position that was called Vice
President for Research and Associate Provost for
Graduate Studies. Because so much of the time,
your research funding is what funds a lot of your
graduate positions. So we brought all that
together and tried to give it a higher level of
visibility in the university to give us a greater
presence in Austin and particularly a greater
presence in Washington, D.C. At a meeting of the
deans, we used to call it the academic, the APC.
Academic Programs Council. If there was a
discussion and a difference of opinion, which of
the deans with the other deans do you think would
have been the most persuasive? Was there any dean
that could move some of his or her colleagues more
than the others?
Probably. for
two reasons. One was that he had a superb program in
the College of Business, but secondly, he had also
served as an academic vice president and provost
at another institution and had a background that
was recognized among the others and his people
skills did a lot.
And did you have a person that you would have
listened to most closely for truly candid advice?
Yeah, I had two people really, and that would be
Jerry Gaston and Danny Parker, because we were all
just side by side in the provost office. And Bill
Perry, I have to also add Bill Perry. associate
provost and dean of faculties, and I brought Bill
into that position. And I had forgotten him a
moment ago as such an important part of that team of
people. So when we had decisions that needed to be
made, we were right there in my office, and those
were my confidants, and they were people I really
trusted. Now, Bill replaced Clint Phillips when
Clint retired. That is correct. Bill replaced
Clint Phillips and had come from the College of
Science. A superb teacher of math. A superb math
teacher. According to our children. And still,
when he was associate provost and dean of
faculties, he said, I will do it if you will still
let me teach one course a semester. And I said,
Bill, I would want you to do that. I did that every
semester of my whole life. First of all, it keeps
you in contact with the realities. No question.
Absolutely. Let's see. Any funny moments you can
remember? Goofy? Hilarious? Something came
apart?
Well, one of the funniest was the incident I told
about the gas, running out of gas. And oh, I'll tell
you one that was. I had my 50th birthday when I was
senior vice president and provost. And I came into
work that day and they had black balloons and
things all over the administration building in
that beautiful rotunda. And I thought, well,
that's the end of it. And that was a Friday. The next
day at the football game, we're up in the
president's box. And at halftime, I look up, and
here comes the airplane. Oh, my goodness. And the
airplane has this big trailer on it, and it says,
EDG is old. Happy 50th birthday. And about that
time, they all started looking at it, and they all
brought out these whistles and balloons and
everything. And we had a party in the president's
box, and it was a great, great time. Okay, now let's
go back to when you became the, and the title was
interim? Interim president.
Was there any surprise that Bill Mobley was
selected as chancellor? No, I don't think so at all
because Bill had done such a superb job in leading
the university to a new level of achievement. And
secondly, he had also served as the executive vice
chancellor second in command of the system. So he
had clearly proven himself. All right. And did, as
you became the interim president, is that the
word? Were there any problems created for you by
the manner in which you were identified? Yes.
For me. A
comment or two.
And
that created some awkward moments. And I went to
the faculty senate and felt that I needed to
explain why I had accepted it, because it was out of
my loyalty to continue to move the university
forward. But I was placed in a very awkward
situation at that time, no question. And this
occurred, this transfer took place when? It took
place in August of 1993. August of 93. And you were
still living in your home. Right. So there was no
discussion of your moving to the President's home
at that point. There was, and we were allowed to if
we wanted to, but my wife and I determined that We
might not, if I were a candidate, want the
position, and if I were a candidate, I didn't want
to give a presumptuous impression. Although we
did stay there some, and we did use the home quite
frequently for many kinds of entertaining
events. So you became the CEO of the campus just in
time for football season. Just in time for
football season, which I must tell you was my
favorite time of the year. describe how that way.
Well, I'm a huge football fan. And I will tell you
that it was not the regular routine football
season. Because during the whole fall, we were
trying to wrap up the entire NCAA investigation of
that last infraction issue. And I spent hours upon
hours with in meetings with university people,
with investigators. We hired a firm out of Kansas
City that had a track record of getting to the
bottom of all of these. I know them well. That's
their specialty. I know them well.
The whole time I was going through football season
and going to the football games, I was still
handling those issues on a daily basis. But
football weekends were, to me, very special.
Describe a typical home game football weekend. A
home football weekend started Friday. And it
started mid-morning Friday with a lot of events,
people coming to town that wanted to see you. A lot
of things were sponsored by the Association of
Former Students. There were usually meetings
that they had. Every college had development
council meetings. All kinds of meetings on
Fridays. So Fridays were just devoted to meetings
and speeches. And I usually just pretty well in
advance knew that. Saturdays of the football
weekends were just crammed full and started
usually with an early morning breakfast. What we
had to do in order to get from place to place was very
carefully scheduling in our office, but we had a
student in a university vehicle that would
actually drive me from place to place so that I
could meet the time frames of where I needed to be.
And it was not uncommon to have and go to six or eight
events And one of the highlights to me was the
pre-game meal where I got to thank the people who
were there, introduce the legislators, the
guests, the board of regents, the other
university's president who was there, and to have
a little presentation done by a student about some
student program at A&M. And then the ball game and
then after the ball game, I probably spent more
time in the Hilton without spending the night
there than anybody because all the class
reunions. And I might speak to four or five of those
in one afternoon or one evening and get home about
midnight that night. But I will tell you that I
enjoyed probably those speeches and that
interaction as much as anything I ever did in my
life. And I'll never forget And I probably
shouldn't say that sitting here talking to you. We
beat, I think it was the University of Missouri, 73
to nothing. And it was the class reunion for the
class of 73, and I told them, I said, I just want you
to know that I instructed the team to score 73
points for you, and they did it. And it was one of
those unique opportunities that was there. So
those were hectic weekends, and Sunday after a
football game was a day of recovery.
Give an example of a goofy request, proposal that
somebody gave to you while you were in that CEO job.
Remember anything? Well, I'll tell you one of the
funniest things that ever happened and one of the
goofiest requests we ever got was this written
letter from this dear elderly lady, and you could
tell it from her handwriting, who had watched, I
think, that same ball game where we scored 73
points, and she instructed me to have the students
stop kissing their dates with French kisses after
every touchdown, that she had watched it on
television, and it was repugnant for her to have to
watch, and that I needed to tell the students to
quit doing that. let's see, proud moments well
there were a number of proud moments and those
would clearly be related to what I would feel would
be landmark achievements one was the work done to
get the finality of the Bush Presidential Library
and particularly the facilities I'll never
forget the humility of the Bush family, and how
when we were in Houston meeting with the
architects and called him up one Sunday afternoon
when he was still president, he instructed the
architect that he did not want that facility to be
an edifice to George Bush, but he wanted the
architecture and the facility to reflect Texas
A&M University. We later had to go back and
convince him to upgrade the finish to truly make it
look like a presidential library. But a part of
that was a great... Do you remember how you all
heard the decision that it would be here? Yes. It
happened earlier when I was senior vice president
and provost. I believe that we were in a Board of
Regents meeting. when we got the final word that it
was going to be here. And of course, many people had
a great part in that. A lot of board members. Was it a
telephone message? I think probably it was a
telephone message to a couple of the board members
who had been very instrumental, and to Dr.
Atkinson. And it was announced, and of course you
can imagine the joy that swept through this entire
campus and our university.
Oh my, yes. an achievement that I would be very
proud of would be Reed Arena. We had been stymied
and stopped at every avenue to get that facility
completed. The coordinating board was against it
and it had gotten out of size. Some of our board
members actually wanted it to be larger than the
Super Drum in Austin and that's what got a
jaundiced view of it by the state. So we knew that we
were going to have to cut it back and the board
agreed with that. So we finally got it cut back and
internally we were ready to go, but we could never
get back over the hurdle of what had happened in the
governor's office at that time and with the
coordinating board. And I actually had a board
member or two and some in the university that had
started putting together a proposal to renovate
G. Raleigh-White and I must admit I became pretty
upset about that because that would not solve a
long-term solution and we would gain no seats and
we'd still have an old antiquated facility. So we
were on Texas Southern University's campus
making a presentation to the Coordinating Board
when the chairman of their committee that
approved new construction dr santos a physician
from lubbock was there and this presentation we
were making was about the bush presidential
library well they were supportive and all that
went well and at the end of the meeting dr santos
turned to me and he said well mr president what are
you going to do about your special events center
And I told him, I said, well, sir, we need it badly,
and we'd love to come to you and you give us approval
where we could go. We've got the funding. And I
said, there are some that are wanting, since we
can't get approval, to renovate G. Raleigh White.
He said, well, I can't support that. He said, you
deserve it. A&M deserves it. He said, you know, if
you did that to G. Raleigh White, that would remind
me of something. He said, you know, you can put a
silver saddle on a jackass, but he still looks like
a jackass. And he said, that won't work. He said,
you guys put your proposal together and come see
us. Did he say that in a public session? Oh, yes. It
was a public session. Now, it was mostly just
people who were from universities making a
presentation. So we went to see him, and he agreed
to it. From then on, it was... approved all the way
through. The other major achievement was moving
Texas A&M from the Southwest Conference to the Big
12. And that was an exciting time. Describe all
that you can. Well, I will describe almost all of it
that I can. I want everyone to know that we held out
to the very end, we being the presidents of all of
the Southwest Conference schools, we held out to
the very end that all of the Southwest Conference
schools would go, all eight. But it became very
evident early that the new Big Eight, I mean, I'm
sorry, the new Big 12, the other schools, would not
accept the University of Houston, Rice, SMU, and
TCU. And the reason they wouldn't was the fact that
their attendance was so low that it would drag down
the whole conference and it would drag down the
television packages and revenue stream that had
to be put together for survival of the larger
programs. We would have been left out if we had
stayed in the Southwest Conference, we being the
big schools. And we could never have negotiated
the kinds of television contracts that
unfortunately are essential to survive in
today's big university athletics. So we knew that
we had to do something. Now those four schools,
because two or three years earlier, the attempt
had been made to make the change, and the
legislative bodies stopped it at that time. But
what they did at that time, they put some
parameters of achievement in that these other
schools that had not been drawing attendance had
to achieve, and they hadn't done it and couldn't do
it. So it was then a time where it could now happen.
And we had meetings all across the state. The last
one that I recall was in Dallas across from the
airport where we finally determined that the
other four universities probably were not going
to be able to follow us to join what was at the time I
guess the Big Eight.
There were discussions occurring outside such as
the University of Texas was leaning toward
wanting to go to the Pac-10 so that they could be in
with Stanford and UCLA. Well, we didn't want any
part of that, and we didn't think that probably
that would get a very favorable response from the
state legislature. I had a board member or two
wanting to take A&M to the Southeastern
Conference. Well, we did not want to go to the
Southeastern Conference for two reasons. One was
their academic statue was nowhere near the
schools in the Big Eight. And secondly, they had
more NCAA problems than any of the other schools.
And it was already huge. So the presidents began to
talk to the chairman, who was the president of the
University of Colorado, to finalize how the four
schools would go then to what is now the Big 12.
Well, A&M and Texas were still the two big dogs,
more than Texas Tech and Baylor. And there was a
little hesitancy to accept them. And since UT was
talking to pack 10, the chancellor and I were at
Scott and White and Temple one afternoon, and we
get a call from Lieutenant Governor Bob Bullock,
and Mr. Bullock says, I want you in my office at 4
o'clock this afternoon. So when Mr. Bullock
called, he went to Austin. So we wrapped up our
meeting, and we drove to Austin as fast as we could,
and it was a driving thunder rainstorm I'll never
forget. And it rained and thundered and stormed
the whole time we were in his office. And I walk into
his office, and here's Mr. Bullock. Here is John
Monford, who was chairman of the Senate Finance
Committee and a Texas Tech grad, and from Lubbock.
And here was David Sibley, senator from Waco, and
ties, of course, clearly to Baylor. And here was
one of my board members, Board of Regents And Mr.
Bullock says, I want you to know that everything is
still moving. And that I've heard you are all going
to the Big 12, A&M and Texas. And I clearly want you
to confirm to these other two schools that you're
not going somewhere else and leave them out. And I
want you to confirm that you'll support them for
entry into the Big 12. And he also got the chairman
of the board on the phone and asked him what the
position was. Chairman of the A&M board. Chairman
of the A&M board. And then he got Bill Cunningham on
the phone. And he said, Bill, you guys are not going
to Pac-10, are you? And he said, no, sir. We're all
going to go as the last four schools here at the
Southwest Conference to what will be the new Big
12. And he said, well, I want you to come over here.
And I want you to be in the room and tell these guys
this. So, you know, he was just cementing what we
had worked for a good while to pull together that we
would then form the new conference.